# Dynamics_Modeling_of_Social_Isolation

Abstract — 

Objective: This study conceptualizes radicalization into extremism as a system of human dynamics shaped by social isolation, the inverse of social capital, and examines its progression through a
computational model of population vulnerability. Focusing on the Rise Above Movement (RAM), a transnational white supremacist organization, the research introduces a theoretical framework that disaggregates
social isolation into two interrelated dimensions: personal isolation, referring to individual vulnerabilities that heighten susceptibility to recruitment, and controlled isolation, representing the organizational
mechanisms through which groups such as RAM manipulate members’ perceptions of reality. Method: The model delineates population identity states ranging from susceptible individuals to violent extremist actors and simulates transitions driven by endogenous variables, such as perceived societal crisis. Results: Findings indicate that natural atrophy, changes in family structure, personal circumstances, or evolving worldviews, exert a greater influence on identity transformation than targeted intervention programs. Additionally, in the case of RAM, personal isolation factors are found to have a stronger effect on population-level behavior than the collective mechanisms of controlled isolation. Conclusions: Effective deterrence policies must consider multiple factors, not just one, to promote deradicalization. They should address community influences that encourage engagement with crisis propaganda, extreme beliefs, and grievances. Social isolation fuels extremism and social contagion, and policies should disrupt this contagion’s momentum and reduce vulnerability stemming from a lack of positive role models and adversarial home environments.

## Introduction

Extremism, often conflated with terrorism to respond to non-violent political expression or to wield counterterrorism applications against political opposition, is understood by the legal framework as the “potentially unlawful use or threat of force or violence to advance an ideological agenda (Foster & Wiggins, 2022; Onursal & Kirkpatrick, 2021).”  Extremism can exist in racial or ethnic identitarian strongholds, in religious cults, in nationalist movements, and within political or anti-government ideology, just to name a few. The complexity of it challenges serious interrogation, as a tendency persists that frames any political or ideological differences as extreme (Berger, 2018). What underlying motives are we missing? What is not captured with surface-level analysis? What tools could we use to better understand human behaviors within the extremism and radicalization process that would help generate more impactful mitigation strategies? 

An approach that could prove helpful is exploring extremism and radicalization as a system of influences, brought about by personal and group-reinforced social isolation, as well as the compelling perception of a crisis within a social movement. Research has shown a multitude of contributing factors that influence people who engage in extreme beliefs that escalate to accelerationism, or “the perceived escalation by nefarious entities to advance 'degenerate' values and influences such as multiculturalism, liberalism, and diversity, among others (ADL, 2019)." The objective of using a computational approach is to classify trigger points within a social system that either intensify or moderate these influences, to highlight where potential points of intervention may exist, and to test scenarios where stimuli differ. 

The primary objective of this paper is to consolidate, clarify, and unify the existing knowledge base in radicalization research, and to develop a computational model that simulates the actions and reactions of a vulnerable population, specifically those individuals most likely to be recruited by extremist identity groups. This effort aims to change how extremism is perceived, specifically by viewing social movements as human systems where people exist as cogs in a social and economic machine, play an active role within the totality of the system, and respond in predictable ways to forces exerted by other parts of the system. (Forrester, 1991). Additionally, the intent is to illustrate that radicalization should not be investigated as a linear process, but rather as a complex system of nonlinear influences. These kinds of systems require an alternate way of thinking, one that distinguishes symptoms from underlying root causes without hyper-prescriptive definitions that ignore root social structures (Stroh, 2015). 

In this effort, we model population states of the Rise Above Movement (RAM), a transnational white supremacist movement with an ideology that prioritizes the supremacy of Aryan, white, European American, and primarily Christian identities and their interests (Campbell, 2020). Any identities that do not fit this definition fall under the out-group categorization and are perceived as threats by the movement. The perceived threat from out-groups varies from the Great Replacement Theory that non-Aryan-white ethnicities are plotting to eradicate and replace Aryan-white identities with their own cultures, to belief in conspiracies of cultural movement efforts to denigrate the Aryan-white identity as a lesser identity (ADL, 2022; Jones, 2018). As the name implies, the movement is becoming increasingly global and multi- or transnational, particularly with the growing use of digital and social networks. However, the focus is on the US segment of this social movement. 

We investigate the impact of social isolation on RAM as a two-part framework, comprising personal and controlled isolation mechanisms that drive the social contagion underlying this phenomenon. By mapping the dynamics and adaptive properties of this social system, this research aims to model how the perception of crisis (through social media, propaganda, etc.) drives social isolation, simulates the participation of non-traditional actors, and explores how a vulnerable population responds to varying stimuli in an equalized system. We find that although the perception of crisis impacts both personal and group dynamics, it has a limited influence over the system when compared to de-escalation efforts and the natural atrophy of extremism. However, this perception is cheap and enduring, whereas de-escalation efforts come at higher resource costs.  Furthermore, the model illustrates that natural atrophy, such as changes in family needs, life events, or shifts in perspective, has a greater impact on changing states of identity than external de-escalation efforts. The remainder of the paper is organized as an exploration of the social isolation categorizations, methods used to model human behavior, simulation and experimentation results, and the sociological significance of studying RAM using computational methods. 

